Hey guys, welcome to System Design Fight Club. Today I'm going to be going over 
most of what I know about database indexing. This is a topic that I've wanted to
 do for a while, so I'm pretty excited to finally get a chance to cover it. Uh w
hat we have here at the front is a list of all the things that I'm hoping to cov
er in this video. Along the left are some visuals I'm hoping will really help wh
en I'm trying to explain some of these concepts. Hopefully, I'll get around to a
dding some chapters or key moments or whatever it's called to this video so that
 it gets much easier to click around for whatever uh concept you're most interes
ted in hearing about. Otherwise, this is basically the end of the script that I'
ve actually written out for this video. And uh video editing takes a tremendous 
amount of time, which is why I don't do that. So, the video is about to get a bi
t more clunky. Um most of what I know about this topic comes from the following 
resources. uh designing data intensive applications by Martin Kleman and databas
e internals by Alex Petrov. This is uh kind of going to be relevant a little bit
 later in the video. I've also had to read a lot of documentation on specific da
tabases to figure out certain things like um what databases support what feature
s, why those features even make sense. Um there was a few that aren't even cover
ed in these books such as um vector indices, skip lists. So, um, that's why I fe
lt compelled to even make this video. I I'm not just going to summarize those bo
oks and make a video about it. That's lame. Uh, we're going to add a little bit 
more that aren't covered in those, um, books. So, there's two key concepts that 
I think are going to be really important for setting some context for, uh, the t
ypes of indexes that I'm going to be covering. Uh, the first one is the rum conj
ecture. You can read about it in database internals by Alex Petrov. It's the bes
t thing that I think covers the rum conjecture. I actually couldn't even find a 
Wikipedia article about the Rome conjecture. Um, it has uh I think it came from 
a a paper an academic paper. There's a whole academic paper about it. It's this 
really obvious concept, but like you you don't it's one of those things that lik
e after it's explained to you, it like really helps to uh think about stuff, but
 um it's it's like super obvious. It's kind of like CAP theorem but for uh index
es. So RUM stands for read update memory overhead. Um and you have to make a tra
de-off between the speed of your read operations and the speed of your write ope
rations. Um you can kind of do uh a little trade-off involving memory overhead. 
That's a little bit of a in between on those. An example of that is with LSM tre
es where your right operations are super fast. they just go straight to um disk,
 just a a pinned to file. They're very fast, but then you have all this extra sp
ace wasted at the end of this file. It's just kind of sitting around. Um so that
 that's that's where you you have this wasted memory by trying to make your read
 operations a lot more fast. Um and uh I think I'd already said that there isn't
 really a Wikipedia article on rum conjecture. The best resource for finding stu
ff about it is on database internals by Alex Petrov. um or maybe the the the aca
demic paper on it. The second concept uh you might have read you might have seen
 this before if you've read designing data intensive applications by Martin Kman
. It's that a database is basically a write ahead log with a materialized view. 
For example, Kafka can kind of be thought of as purely a write ahead log. Um if 
you were to add indexes to Kafka, you're kind of turning it into a database. The
 fastest way to do um write operations in a database is if you have uh no indexe
s at all. if you just have the the righthead log on its own, it's a a really um 
insightful way to kind of view databases is that you just start with the righthe
ad log and then you can kind of um add these indexes over top of it as a materia
lized view. So that's also kind of why uh the first type of index I want to cove
r is no index. Um so if you don't have any indexes at all, you just have the rig
ht ahead log. That's all that's left. Uh that's the fastest way to do a write op
eration. That's why I wanted to cover it is that like like I said with run conje
cture um the when you whenever you add a index you're making a trade-off of um i
ncreasing the uh amount of time that takes to perform a write operation. Uh when
ever you add an index that means that every time you're trying to add a new reco
rd there's a little bit of extra uh processing time that needs to be used in ord
er to update all the indexes that it's going to be included on. Um, so the faste
st way to do a write operation is if you don't have any uh if you don't have any
 indexes at all. And so that's why Kafka is um really fast at handling uh write 
operations. There's there's no indexes on it. Um data warehouses also don't real
ly have um indexes. Uh so when you when you add these indexes, it speeds up your
 uh record lookups. If you're trying to look up a individual record, you're goin
g to have like a log of in access, but typically when you're working with data w
arehouses, it's um OLAP queries and you're just doing full table scans anyways. 
So, you don't really need to have really fast lookups of individual records beca
use you're just going to go ahead and scan the full table anyways. Uh in some ca
ses, you might add a materialized an actual thing called a materialized view. An
d we're going to maybe talk about that a little bit at the end. Um I'm not super
 familiar with those materialized views, but um usually when I've done something
 with um a data warehouse or with OLAP queries. Um it just kind of pulls out the
 entire file and it just kind of scans over the whole thing. And so they actuall
y just kind of um typically forego the use of uh indexes entirely and then they 
just do something a little bit alternative where they have the column R data sto
rage where um it's really fast at doing those full table scans over a record ove
r over a column. So you would maybe like filter the the full table over um speci
fic ranges uh for the value. Um, and so you're just scanning down the full table
 along one of those columns. And so then the the column access is really fast, b
ut you don't have any secondary indexes because you're not doing individual uh r
ecord lookups. Um, when you're doing something like a Spark job, I'd imagine tha
t it might be doing something to have these other auxiliary data structures in m
emory. I'd imagine, but but like on disk, it it like pulls stuff into memory. An
d so like the on disk storage is just going to be column R. It's not going to ha
ve any secondary indexes there. Um and uh well that's my coverage for no index. 
Uh for primary keys um we're of course going to talk about it in a distributed s
etting as well. Uh primary key is a partition key plus an optional sort key. Um 
the partition key is basically what node that you're going to put the record ont
o. And then that also helps for retrieval because then it's going to know what u
h what node to pull the data off of. Um picking out a proper partitioning key is
 really important for making sure your key range queries are really efficient. U
m I have some diagrams over here um to kind of show that with key range queries.
 Um so it's it's it's like if you don't pick out a proper partition key, you you
 get this like scatter gather that's not really performant. I have a whole video
 on this that's 100 seconds long and a lot more uh welllaid out. Um but uh parti
tioning keys very important for picking out uh for for uh optimizing the perform
ance of your key range queries. Um I did actually kind of have some examples for
 that. Um so traditionally under uh so let let's say that we have a posts table 
for a social media website something kind of like Facebook but not necessarily s
uch huge volume. um and you don't really have celebrity issues. So, this schema 
might kind of make sense. Um when it's under a single node setup, uh you would b
e able to do an auto increment like this. Uh and you can just have um when you h
ave the whole thing on one node, it's possible to just colllocate all of the rec
ords. And so then you're able to just go ahead and use a primary key right here.
 Um but when it's distributed, you're not actually able to do an auto increment.
 And then your uh your uh primary key your your so you can't do a um an auto inc
rement in a distributed database. That would require total ordering. That's why 
you can't do an auto increment in distributed database. Well, you can if it's li
nearizable like Spanner. Um but that's also really expensive. And so usually you
 try and avoid having to do a total ordering by just dodging the the need for an
 auto increment. you just get rid of the auto increment and then you just have u
yu IDs instead that look like this. And so uh then you're you're you can still u
se this as a a primary key I guess in distributed setting. Um and so if you're g
oing to do hash partitioning um in a distributed database you can go ahead and u
se post ID for that. Um and and it would still know like what node to uh go to f
or the write operation and for the read operation. But your key range queries um
 like I said uh over here for uh how it looks under hash partitioning you now do
n't know what uh node that a specific thing might uh live on if you're doing a k
ey range query. So if I'm trying to retrieve like all of my own posts on uh so l
ike let's say that I'm doing a view of my um own accounts posts. Uh so it's like
 the if you go to my Twitter account or something like that then um you would wa
nt to have all of my posts come come up and um those might be on a bunch of diff
erent nodes. Uh so that's why it looks like this under a hash partitioning. Um s
o that's actually really inefficient. You want to avoid doing that scatter gathe
r like that. And so that's why you would pick out a partitioning key of um this.
 And then uh that's not uniquely identifying. You need to have a sort key as wel
l. And so your sort key can be something like uh this one. And then you have you
r uniqueness constraint satisfied. And then when you're doing a key range query 
for a specific user, you would have it uh all servable off of a single node. Um 
and you have your unique your uniqueness constraint satisfied. Um so you'd also 
be able to look up individual posts. So, like with Twitter for example, um somet
imes news articles will do this thing where they show a specific tweet and um if
 you click on that tweet, it'll pull up a page that consists solely of that sing
ular tweet. Um and so then it's not doing a key range query, it's doing a a sing
le record lookup. And so you don't have to like so under that scenario, hash par
titioning works just fine. But the fact that you still have the user profiles um
 is why you would typically want to use a partitioning key so that you can serve
 up those key range queries really efficiently. Um yeah. Okay. Um was there anyt
hing else I wanted to cover for primary keys? Oh, well, so there's a second sort
 key that we could have used here. We probably could have used the time stamp as
 the sort key unless we allowed users to post two tweets in the same millisecond
. Um, so I I mean maybe we'd have some kind of rate limiting. It would it'd be k
ind of hard to properly enforce that without having a linearizable database. Um,
 so the the safer thing to do would probably be to just go ahead and go off of p
ost IDs because you can go ahead and generate a UYU ID properly. Um, but this is
 a good candidate for like a secondary index for example. Uh, and we'll talk abo
ut secondary indexes a bit more later in the video. Um, I think first I want to 
talk about KV stores. So KV stores actually use a hash table in RAM. Um, typical
ly when you're working with a cache like memcacheed, um, or Reddus, I I don't ac
tually like using Reddus for this example because typically your cache is not go
ing to support secondary indexes and it's not going to support persisting to dis
k, which Reddus does. Reddus used to just be a cache. Um, but now it supports al
l these crazy things that are used for regular old databases. So, memcache is a 
better example of this. It's entirely in RAM. I'm fairly certain. I'm fairly cer
tain they're not pulling a Reddus and just doing tons of crazy features. I'm pre
tty sure it's just a plain old key store. Uh, usually caches don't support any s
econdary indexes at all. Um, and uh, so it's entirely in RAM. Uh, I was I was ac
tually really curious about why there aren't any um, persistent databases that a
lso support this like hasht thing. Apparently hashts don't work on disk. Um so w
ith Bres's log of in lookup a hashts bigo of one. So it was like why don't you s
upport having a hasht style um index on like dynamob or something. Apparently ha
shts just don't really work on disk from what I've heard. Um but they they're mu
ch more efficient than than b trees or lsm trees that the most efficient way of 
looking up a record you know big O of one that's a hash table. You can't have it
 with disk apparently. you can't have it on a hard disk. Um, so that's why you c
an only find that with like memcache or reddus. Uh, and I thought that was reall
y fascinating. Um, and since the the lookups, so like I said with with memcache,
 it usually usually caches don't support secondary indexes at all. Um, so you're
 only going to be able to support single record lookups where you specify like t
he full primary key in order to retrieve the full record. And um um because of t
hat uh you don't have that concern that you would have with um key range queries
. You you don't have key range queries really on um caches uh to my understandin
g. So it it makes a lot of sense to actually do hash partitioning I think most t
he time with caches. Um, with Reddus, you might do some other things because you
 might be taking advantage of indices. But I think with caches, you would usuall
y want to use a hash partitioning strategy because you're mainly just doing sing
le record lookups because it's a key value store. You're looking up a specific k
ey for a specific value. So, you can go ahead and use hash partitioning almost a
ll the time with those. Um, and then that brings us to uh the traditional um ind
exes that you're going to see talked about the most. Uh, B trees and LSM trees. 
These usually apply to the primary key. Um you usually see those more rare types
 of uh indexes when you're talking about um the secondary indexes. So like r tre
es, inverted indexes, those usually apply a lot more to um the secondary index. 
Uh the primary index. Um so this is this is what's used by default for your prim
ary keys. If you're not specifying something else, you're usually going to get e
ither a B tree or an LSM tree. And the default tree that's used is going to depe
nd on the implementation internals of your database. So for DynamoB, the storage
 engine that it uses um is actually going to use uh B trees. I don't know what t
he spec specific um storage engine that uses um is called um whether it's like N
ODB versus like wired tiger or something like that. But I do know that it curren
tly uses B trees. Um for other um databases like Cassandra, u it uses um LSM tre
es. Um Spanner uh also uses an LSM tree. Um I actually was a little surprised by
 that. I thought it might have used a B tree, but um LSM trees were actually I t
hink kind of invented at Google. So it does kind of make sense that most of thei
r databases like Spanner are going to be using an LSM tree as well. Um, but uh t
his this is like these are the default indexes that are going to be used by your
 database if you don't specify uh anything else. And uh it's it's usually what y
ou're I I I don't think you can get any of the weird types of trees for your pri
mary key. I don't know if you can actually get an R tree for your primary key. I
t's it's typically going to be one of these two. Um and uh one of them is so B t
rees are actually read optimized. So we see that run conjecture coming up here i
s that one of them is more optimized for read operations while the other one is 
more op uh more optimized for write operations. Um B trees are the most efficien
t uh it's it's the most efficient way to look up a record for read operations wh
ile for LSM trees it's a it's a simple append to file like I said earlier and so
 it's a lot more optimized for writes. There's actually more tuning you can do u
h within B trees and LSM trees that actually uh are are uh doing more fancy stuf
f with that trade-off between um read latency and write latency. Um so for for B
 trees, for example, you actually have BW trees. There's a few others. Um they'r
e they're described in detail in database internals by Alex Petrov. I'm not goin
g to go over them here. Um, so like I can't specify to Dynamo DB that I want to 
use a BW tree or like a B+ tree or B star tree or whatever they're all called. U
m, so I I'm like not really able to pick which of these I'm going to use. I do k
now that it's going to vary depending on what storage engine that you use. So I 
think MongoDB for example has this variation of B trees where it like buffers th
e rights which is really interesting. But like I'm I'm not able to specify that 
uh within like which database I'm using. I can't specify that to Dynamo DB. And 
I think that the trade-offs between like a regular B tree and like a BW tree are
 not going to be significant enough to really force me to switch from DynamoB ov
er to MongoDB. Um so that's why I haven't really studied it myself a whole lot. 
if you're really interested in like rolling your own database from scratch, you'
d probably want to like look into that a whole lot. Um, and again, uh, database 
internals is probably the best book for that. I couldn't find that kind of detai
ls, um, in any other any of the other books that I've, uh, been reading so far. 
Um, and then, uh, LSM tries also do have some kind of tuning that you can do in 
terms of like the the rate of the compactions that it does. Um, but, uh, again, 
it still is an LSM tree. It still is an LSM tree. it's it's not doing it. It jus
t has a different layout to its files than the way that B trees do. And so you'r
e just really not going to get the same kind of um read speed that you would wit
h just using a B tree. Um but there is options for trying to tune it a little bi
t. Um I' I've never personally done that and I haven't heard of anybody that I h
aven't seen any like company blog posts that uh really emphasize doing that kind
 of thing. Okay, I'm trying to figure out if there was anything else that I want
ed to cover before going over secondary indexes. Oh yeah, I don't know if I full
y covered this while I was talking about the example with the different partitio
ning strategies, but um so if you're specifying um a partitioning key and you wa
nt to do hash partitioning, um if you're if you're trying to do hash partitionin
g, this is what you'd use as the partitioning key. While if you're trying to do 
range partitioning, you would use this as the partitioning key. if you're trying
 to just um that's under the use case where you're trying to view a specific acc
ount's profile with all their like tweets or all their Facebook posts. Um it's r
ange partitioning because it pulls up all of their posts off of a single node. Y
ou're able to service it like this. While if you were using this as the partitio
ning key, um that's hash partitioning. And so it has it doesn't know which speci
fic node all the posts are located on. they're actually probably spread a across
 uh multiple and so you're going to get this scatter gather pattern. Um this is 
detailed a lot in designing data intensive applications. I believe it's kind of 
I think it's over in um like the fourth chapter. It's the one after where he tal
ks about B trees versus LSM trees. I think it's the partitioning chapter. Okay, 
I think we're good to move on to secondary indexes. Uh so this is where that lin
k from W3 schools was really relevant. Um it doesn't just index like you don't h
ave a secondary index on all four of these fields to begin with. You have to spe
cify it using something like the create index uh statement which uh I usually se
nd people this link when they hear me talking about secondary indexes that you t
hat it's even a thing that you have to specify. Yes, if you want to have a log o
f in lookup on um so for example uh with inverted indexes if you're trying to fi
nd all the uh tweets that include the word coffee you're going to have to add a 
inverted index over like this field uh you are able to do that in postgresql pos
tgrql as well. It does support inverted indexes. We're going to go over that aga
in towards the end. Um, but uh, if you wanted to be able to look up all of um, a
 specific user's tweets that include a specific word, you have to add a secondar
y index there. It's not there by default. And there's special syntax specificall
y for doing that. It's it's not indexed by default, though. You have to manually
 add secondary indexes. Uh, for Dynamo DB, it supports up to, I think, like 30 s
econdary indexes. It supports up to 30 um, local secondary indexes. It sports I 
think like eight global secondary indexes. I'm going to talk about the differenc
e between these two things a little bit more later on, but um secondary indexes,
 it's extra stuff. We're trying to speed it up. Um so, for example, if you're tr
ying to add pagionation um uh as in like a paged view of a person's tweets where
 they're sorted chronologically. Um, so for example, you you know, you have your
 your the tweets that I sent in January and then you want to look at the tweets 
I sent in, um, December, uh, and then another month back. Uh, you'd be sorting t
hem by the time stamp. And, um, if you want to make that a lot faster, you would
 go ahead and add a secondary index over this field. And if you don't specify wh
at type of index that you want to use like arch tree versus um you know any of t
hese other fancy ones like an inverted index by default it's going to use whatev
er is built into the storage engine. So if you're I I think PostgresQL might act
ually support uh using a different storage engine that is an LSM tree. Um but th
e default storage engine of PostgresQL is definitely one that uses B trees to my
 understanding. Um so uh that means that um whatever you specified as the uh pri
mary key is going to use a B tree and then when you add a secondary index that i
s also going to be a B tree. Um as opposed to Cassandra where the LSM tree is uh
 what it uses for the default type of index. So in Cassandra um this would use u
h well actually it'd be the sort key that uses an LSM tree. This one is just wha
t node it's on. So the sort key is going to be what uses an LSM tree. And then i
f you wanted to add a secondary index for the timestamp, that one is also going 
to be an LSM tree. So whatever the default of the storage engine is is what it's
 going to use by default for the secondary indexes. Um but you are also able to 
specify um so in PostgreSQL, if you wanted to add a R tree over a couple of diff
erent indexes, your a couple of different keys, you can actually specify that wo
uld be an R tree. So, if you don't do that, it's it's just going to use the B tr
ee by default. Um, and I'm also going to talk about concatenated indexes in a bi
t, and that will that'll be interesting. Um, I'll just leave it at that. Um, so 
I mentioned that the indexes are usually local. So, by default, your secondary i
ndexes are going to be local secondary indexes as opposed to global secondary in
dexes. Um, so that's also what's kind of going on here with the key range query 
is that you can actually kind of um if you're not if you have data that lives on
 a bunch of different nodes that you're trying to retrieve in a key range query,
 you can go ahead and do a global secondary index on that, then it does actually
 speed it up a lot. Um and so you don't really have that issue with the scatter 
gather that you get under hash partitioning. But uh it requires um something tha
t's a lot more intensive for the write operations. You actually have to go ahead
 and write to all of the to my understanding you have to write to all of the nod
es in order for the global index to work. Um, that's kind of like the difference
 between a local versus global secondary index is that the local index is just a
 B tree that's on that specific machine and it only has data about that one spec
ific machine. For global secondary index, there's data about all the records bas
ically on all the machines from what I've heard. And so in order to um add a rec
ord or update a record, it has to send updates to multiple machines. So if you'r
e updating just one record, it still has to write to multiple different machines
 in order to update the global secondary index. And so that requires that that's
 going to be uh very expensive for your write operations. It's good for your rea
d. So again, we're seeing that that rum conjecture at play here is that you're a
ble to speed up your your key range queries for the reads by adding a global sec
ondary index, but it's very very expensive for your write operations, which is w
hy you don't really see it in practice. Um, I've I've definitely not really seen
 this um brought up in a lot of uh use cases because it's uh uh it it only reall
y makes sense for cases where it's read heavy with uh a lot of key range queries
 um and you're not able to avoid the scatter gather. Usually you're able to avoi
d the scatter gather by doing by picking a proper partitioning key. So like with
 with this example, we were able to avoid a scatter gather and that's what you u
sually see. Um if for some reason you're not able to avoid that, it might make s
ense to do uh the global secondary index. But um another alternative is that you
're you can just do um multiple read optimized views of a database. So you would
 have your your your primary store and then you would just have multiple differe
nt um downstream versions of it that are partitioned in different ways. And so t
hen depending on the type of uh key range query like whether you're trying to lo
ok at pageionated stuff by chronological order versus stuff by I don't know what
 else it would be but like by by content or if you had some other thing that was
 weird location. I guess you'd go ahead and partition by location on some other 
secondary downstream data store. And then if you're trying to look at tweets fro
m a specific location, you could go ahead and like read off of that or something
. Um, so it it's it's rare that you would actually want to go for a global secon
dary index. It it doesn't make sense in a lot of cases. It's it's I I have yet t
o really find a case where it would make sense and you can't just do uh read opt
imized views instead. It's it's interesting. Uh they are implemented in Dynamob.
 Like I said, it supports up to like eight global secondary indexes. I think Spa
nner supports it as well. Um but it just like doesn't make sense very often. So,
 it's it's like a very fascinating feature and I'm actually like it's um I I kin
d of have um it's not a huge goal for me, but like I'd like to find a use case w
here it like totally makes sense, like provably makes sense to use a global seco
ndary index. And there's there's it's kind of tricky, but they're worth bringing
 up because, you know, it's it's a type of index. Okay. Is there anything else I
 wanted to cover for secondary indexes? I have like these other notes off screen
. Oh. Oh, no. I did cover that. Okay. Yeah. And then I don't have anything that 
like showcases I I literally can't think of a use case where global secondary ne
xus makes sense. Um, all right. multi-dimensional indices. So let's say that our
 tweets also had a latitude and longitude. So we have um latitude, longitude and
 you can do let's say it's like -47 47° and then we have um they're located at 3
2.78. Um, so if you're trying to have it um if you're trying to look up tweets f
rom around a certain location under a concatenated index, it just kind of append
s them one after the other. And so those are it it has like a B tree where it's 
sorted by latitude and then longitude and you're not really narrowing them both 
down at the same time. Um, some examples of um concatenated indexes are actually
 with our our primary key. So in the case of um if you actually went back to tha
t single node setup um where I was talking about um uh an auto increment if you 
did have an auto increment of um say four five six7 is the post ID because you'r
e using that auto increment and you're trying to do a you're trying to create a 
primary key uh you could go ahead and have it as the you could have your primary
 key as like user ID, post ID. Uh there's cases where you like need extra things
 in order to like fully specify uh the to fully fill the uniqueness constraint. 
Sometimes you have to um use multiple columns to satisfy that uniqueness constra
int. So then you can you make a concatenated index where you're narrowing down b
y one attribute and then another um and combined maybe the two different um colu
mns do not individually um provide uniqueness but combined they do provide uniqu
eness and so you concatenate them together. It's kind of like if you were to jus
t make another field called primary key and it just consists of my um user ID co
ncatenated to my post ID like as a string concatenation just like that. So that'
s that's basically what a concatenated index is is it's sorted by if if all the 
records are sorted alphabetically. I think that's usually how you do that with s
trings if you're using a B tree rather than a inverted index. it's going to narr
ow it down alphabetically and so it's sorted first by the username and then by t
he post ID um so that's concat concatenated it's not it's not narrowing down by 
both at the same time you are actually able to narrow down by um two attributes 
at the same time and um the the most classical example of that is if you're doin
g uh geographical queries with latitude and longitude um there's a bunch of diff
erent ways that you're able to do it trees quad trees geo hashes. Um, I really l
ike our trees for some reason. I Well, I mean, they're they're built into Postgr
ql. Um, uh, I don't know. It just has some kind of like jona sequa to it. Uh, I 
like our trees. Um, geohashes have some kind of issue where it's it's I I I don'
t want to go over geographical indices in detail. There's plenty of resources ou
t there for that and then I would just be quoting them. Um, I think Alex Shu's v
olume two book actually kind of talks about the trade-offs of these different th
ings, but um, it's something to be aware of. And, uh, so quad trees I thought ar
e only two-dimensional, while with archeries, it's much higher dimensional than 
that. You can support, uh, narrowing down by, uh, three like different attribute
s at the same time or even like five. Uh, it's really fascinating. you you're ab
le to support not it's geographical data is the most common use case for these m
ulti-dimensional indices but you you are able to do like three or more different
 attributes for the narrowing down and um so if in uh in PostgreSQL if you're tr
ying to do the create index for something that has geographical data um you woul
d you would use that create index syntax and uh oh I don't think it actually spe
cifies how you would clarify which type of tree that you want to um use but you 
you would just have something like uh here I'll go ahead and share so if we were
 trying to do um geoindex where we have latitude and longitude, you're able to s
pecify R tree in there. And that's that's actually how you do that is that you y
ou specify that you want to use an R tree. Otherwise, it's going to use a B tree
 by default. So, when you're trying to use an R tree or a inverted index with Po
stgreSQL, it it does support those. uh you have to specify that you want the R t
ree or the inverted index. Otherwise, it's going to use a B tree and it's just g
oing to be a concatenated index instead. You have to specify the type of tree if
 you want to use the special ones from the secondary index options. Okay, I thin
k we're good to move on to inverted indexes. Um, oh, I also also when you're usi
ng the multi-dimensional indices, if you have a use case where you need um to us
e one of these fancy indexes, so if you if you have geographical data, that's ac
tually going to limit your um database choices. So, if geographical data and hav
ing really performant lookups of geographic data is important for your use case,
 you can't use DynamoB. Actually, I don't think Dynamob supports any type of mul
ti-dimensional index. Um, PostgreSQL supports our trees. I I brought that up mul
tiple times. Um, Alaskport supports quad trees. Reddus has geohash. I I didn't r
eally come across a lot of other databases that support these things though. Um,
 there's probably a couple, but it was uh I I didn't really dig that far into it
. I'm I'm not going to spend all day trying to find databases that support the m
ulti-dimensional indices. Um like if it comes up in like an interview that like 
oh so we're going to be designing Uber uh I want to use a quad tree. I I feel li
ke it's it might be fair game for your interviewer to go okay what database like
 like what are are you like are you going to roll that yourself? Are you going t
o roll Quad Trees yourself if you're designing Uber? I don't think that's I don'
t think that's uh reasonable unless you're in most cases where you're you're dea
ling with um geographical data. It's not so core to your business or your busine
ss is not large enough that you it would be financially feasible for you to just
 roll your own quad tree. Uh so instead you would want to find a database that a
lready has that implemented. So like if if my own team at Amazon was dealing wit
h geographical information for whatever reason, it wouldn't be such a key part o
f how Amazon works that uh we would be like okay time to roll our own quad tree 
implementation. No, instead we would use um open search which is like built on t
op of a really old version of elastic search. And so it's like oh geographic dat
a and um it's actually this is going to be hit a lot. It's going to be you know 
it's going to have like 100,000 TPS. Okay, we should probably make sure this is 
efficient. Let's use elastic search. Um, that's why I care about knowing about t
hese implementations is that I like to be kind of realistic and um, yeah, you yo
u you shouldn't be ruling quad trees yourself unless you're actually, you know, 
working on Uber on the geographic systems. I think I've gone on about that enoug
h. Uh, we can talk about inverted indexes now. Um, yeah. So, inverted indexes, y
ou're also not going to find those everywhere. You're not going to find that in 
Dynamo DB. I don't think that supports an inverted index. Um, elastic search is 
what you're what is most known for supporting inverted index indexes, but um, yo
u actually aren't forced to use elastic search. There is actually a couple of ot
her options. Um, PostgreSQL supports it. I'm fairly certain Reddus supports it. 
I don't I'm going to go ahead and link this file in the comments like I usually 
do. um Reddus supports it. Uh PostgreSQL like you don't have to use elastic sear
ch. So what what's great about PostgresQL supporting it is that if you were goin
g to do that manual partitioning trick that I've probably done in in you know so
 many videos uh you can do the manual partitioning of PostgreSQL and then you ca
n have your very efficient key range queries plus an R tree or or an inverted in
dex. So you can do your manual partitioning strategy and have an inverted index.
 So um uh I don't know how well elastic search I I'm I'm using elastic search at
 at at work and and um I don't I don't know how well it really supports various 
partitioning strategies. It's it's wonky in its own ways and it doesn't necessar
ily have everything that you want. Postrql has a lot of features though. But, yo
u know, it also has our trees on top of inverted indexes. Um, so I I mean, if yo
u're using Elastic Search and you want an inverted index, you also have geograph
ic data. So, it's like tweets with geographic data and you want to find you want
 to find all the tweets that have the word coffee within Seattle, Seattle's geog
raphic location. Um, you'd be able to use elastic search with a quad tree. Um, a
nd it supports inverted indexes. You can also use PostgreSQL with an R tree and 
an inverted index because it supports that with Reddus. Apparently, it also supp
orts inverted indices. And then it has uh geohashes. I don't know if it supports
 uh I don't recall Reddus supporting either of these things. So, you would maybe
 not be able to use Reddus for uh that use case. Um, and inverted indexes are al
so really fascinating because uh, google.com actually is a gigantic inverted ind
ex. They don't use elastic search. They don't use elastic search. Um, they of co
urse roll it themselves. They have their own home rolled inverted index. It's gi
gantic. It It's uh, it would not work well under Alaska search. I think I'd rece
ntly heard that GitHub even had kind of outgrown their own um elastic search set
up that they were using for code search. Um maybe if I find the link to that I'l
l stick it in the description or something. But uh sometimes you can be uh too b
ig for using elastic search and so uh you might just roll it yourself like googl
e.com does. Um, otherwise if it's something smaller, um, I don't know if Twitter
's too big for elastic search, but, um, you know, if you if you're trying to loo
k up text, if you're trying to support text search on something, uh, text search
 on something, uh, smaller than Google.com, which is the majority of the interne
t, uh, you could go ahead and use elastic search for that or PostgreSQL. Uh it j
ust kind of depends on what you're trying to do with your your your database and
 the specifics of um whether it's more read heavy or write heavy. So if it's a b
it more writeheavy um I don't know if elastic search would be so great for that.
 I don't know it it depends on the use case. It depends on the use case but it's
 important to have multiple options that you're not just strapped to elastic sea
rch. Um and then going back to our example, uh so you can form an R tree over tw
o locations and um that would look really interesting. Secondary index tree and 
you can do another inverted uh another index over here. you have a secondary ind
ex and you would have to specify again you would have to specify that it is a in
verted index while with time stamp you don't have to specify anything it'll just
 go ahead and give you a B tree by default I'm going to delete this okay um so I
 think we're good on covering inverted indices uh we're getting on to the much m
ore rare stuff. Um, so for example, skip lists. Uh, very niche, very very niche.
 It's uh there's only like one like access pattern where uh it makes a lot of se
nse to um use uh skip list gaming leaderboard. Um Alex, you has some great cover
age on that use case. Um I've only heard of it implemented in Reddus. I don't kn
ow anything else that implements a skip list. I don't know if it's because it's 
one of those things just like key value stores where you can't have a hash table
 on disk. I don't know if you're able to have a skip list on disk. If you're not
 able to have a skip list implemented with disk, then that would make sense. Tha
t would be why nobody else has a skip list. But it's um for certain cases, I I t
hink I was even able to find at least one other thing where uh skip list would b
e really helpful as an axis pattern, but I can't think of the problem right now.
 U maybe it was get active events. I think get active events. Uh there was one v
ariation of it where skip lists seemed like it would maybe help a lot. Um but it
 was like okay now I'm forced to use Reddus and um I'd prefer to only use Reddus
 as a cache. I don't know why Reddus is implementing so many weird things. Um, a
nd Reddis Reddus has a lot, but it doesn't have everything. And just being stuck
 with this uh one solution is um not great. Uh, it'd be great if there were othe
r options there, but like for the one case of uh where you need this weird acces
s pattern like the one present from gaming leaderboard, uh, it like really calls
 for a skip list and like you only have that in Reddus. Um, I'm not going to go 
over the internals of a skip list. It's It's really interesting. It's kind of li
ke a a linked list with like linked lists that allow you to skip over chunks of 
it. I'm not going to draw the whole thing out. Um, there's other resources that 
probably do that pretty well. Um, so I think we're going to move on. Um, vector 
indexes. So, this is another one that's really niche. Uh, you can find it in Pin
e Cone. uh Facebook's phase, I don't know if it's pronounced like that. Um so th
ese things are specifically created for being a vector database and so then they
 support vector indices. Um it's kind of been really hot over the last year. The
y're they're useful for uh machine learning problems. They're they're very cruci
al to machine learning problems actually. I think it's not just chat gpt where t
hese are useful. It's uh basically it seems like they're useful for basically an
ything where you want to have um personalization. Um so it's uh like the the You
Tube home feed for example uh has personalization to it. Your recommendations ar
e different than other people's recommendations. Um anything that has that perso
nalization aspect to it and a really massive scale um they're probably going to 
want to use a vector index to my understanding. Um, so very apparently like a ve
ry uh common thing to anything that's scaled machine learning. Um, and so then i
t's been hot over the last year. And so you're seeing stuff like uh this new dat
abase called planet scale actually forked my SQL in order to add uh vector index
es to it. And um Reddis, which likes to just implement absolutely everything und
er the sun. What the Uh, it also has vector indices. Um, I don't like that Reddu
s has vector indices. I It's It's a cache. Why does my cache have vector indices
 support? That is rather crazy. Um, but these kind of were like the earlier thin
gs to do it, I think. And then like these I think have come like within the last
 year. Um, I think phase has been around for a little while. Uh, I just read thr
ough the documentation last week. I think it's been around for at least a few ye
ars while these things just sprung up out of I I mean I can't confirm that Reddi
t did it within the last year, but it's just been so much more hot within the la
st year that I would not be surprised that decided, oh, hey, this is cool. A coo
l new index, cool new niche, you know, database feature. Let's uh let's throw it
 in there. Um, yeah, usually if you need vector data, if you if you need this ki
nd of thing, you're you're it's usually such a specific use case, such a specifi
c access pattern that you would like know that it's going to be a part of your u
m justification in your initial choice of the infrastructure for your your servi
ces. And so you're going to just like know like, oh, I'm going to need a vector 
database here. You don't have it as like an afterthought like where you know, yo
u wouldn't you wouldn't find yourself in a pinch with um like PostgreSQL and be 
like, "Oh, shoot. My problem is now a machine learning problem. Now I wish that 
I was not locked into PostgreSQL." Uh, no. You're usually going to like know abo
ut this thing like up front because it's just so specific. Like you you load the
se like embeddings into it. You you're not going to like have embeddings just ki
nd of like come about and then be like, "Oh, I need vector indices." Because we 
have this these embeddings and like now we've decided to start trying to do mach
ine learning stuff with it. Now you have the embeddings because you are doing ma
chine learning and so like you're going to just know in advance this is a machin
e learning problem. We're going to need a vector database and then you're going 
to pick it. So that's like I don't know why you would ever use Reddus as your ve
ctor database. I'd use something that like is much more like oriented entirely a
round handling vector data super efficiently. And so I you you probably use thes
e. Yeah. Um yeah, I I I I don't even know what to think of this this beyond that
. It's uh really one of the latest things I've come across. And yeah, it's weird
. Um okay, let's move on. Um data cubes and materialized views. Okay, so we talk
ed about a database is a write ahead log with a materialized view. There's actua
lly this thing called a materialized view. Um it's for like speeding up stuff li
ke count um min max. There's also uh anything that's an aggregate operation in y
our SQL. So that would mean that this is a thing that involves doing a full tabl
e scan in order to compute. And so you can do these, you know, you just prempute
e the whole thing once and then you store it in a certain way and that's called 
a materialized view. Uh I have no idea what the hell a data cube is, but it's ou
t there. I've never used it. I've worked with OAP stuff a little bit. I think it
's if you're It really seems like it's more of a thing that like somebody entire
ly oriented around being a data analyst would maybe make use of, but like these 
are things out there. You wouldn't have these on um Dynamo DB. It doesn't you yo
u can't do I don't think Dynamo DB actually supports these operations. I'd be su
rprised if it does. It doesn't support joins. I'm fairly certain Dynamo DB does 
not even have joins supported in the syntax. Most NoSQL databases do not support
 joins because they it's like they don't do OLAP and joins are a part of OLAP qu
eries. And so similarly, it would just not make sense to have these in their lan
guage either. like you can't you don't have the keyword join in the syntax of Dy
namo DB or Cassandra I'm fairly certain and so then you can also just not allow 
these in the syntax because they would require a full table scan and it's like t
hat's not you're not using the database properly so it's just not going to be th
ere. Uh if you want that kind of stuff, you should be using um iceberg and then 
just use trino on top of it. Or you can use snowflake or you can use um I think 
data bricks is working on a I'm fairly certain that's another OLAP or data wareh
ouse technology. Um so yeah, you're only going to find you. So it's it's you you
 have to use data warehouse or OLAP databases in order to get these indexes. um 
you're not going to be able to just throw it onto Dynamob. So I also wanted to t
alk about count min sketch. It's not actually an index. I'm fairly certain that 
count min sketch is not actually called an index. But if you think about rum, if
 you think about that rum conjecture for count min sketch, like it's kind of mak
ing uh a very a very alternative trade-off. It's trading off accuracy for really
 fast OLAP queries because this is from uh these are all what you would call um 
real time analytics. Uh and the word analytics that's OLAP that's real time OLAP
. When you when you execute an OLAP query it's okay for it to take like 45 minut
es. uh under under normal OLAP queries where you're working with a data warehous
e, you you're like, "Okay, here's my gigantic um OLAP query and like you're the 
only one using the database. It's not being smacked with like 10kts. Um you're t
he only one using the data warehouse and you know it's it's not end userf facing
. It's not something that determines how fast your web pages are going to load. 
Um, so it can take 45 minutes, but in some cases you need to have like these num
bers immediately. So like if it's a YouTube video where you want to see the view
 count for that video, um, the user is not going to wait 45 minutes for the web 
page to load. You need it real time. You need a real time count. You need a real
- time count for the YouTube video. Real time analytics. That's where this comes
 from. Um, and you know, OLAP queries, they're usually really expensive. How in 
the heck do you pull off the kind of um read speeds that you need here? You you'
re really you really need to make some interesting trade-offs in order to make t
hose those kinds of um things run fast. I guess it it's I I think it kind of sto
res a uh materialized view, but it also does crazy, you know, statistics things 
in order to make it work. And so that's why I think that it you can kind of thin
k of it as um a very interesting trade-off in terms of the rum conjecture. Um an
d then you know not everything has Reddus has this too. I know Reddus has this. 
I I  know Reddus has count min sketch. Why does it have count min sketch? Who ge
ts a cache and then thinks you know what I need here? I need some real time coun
ters. I need I need some real time analytical queries on my cache. Why is that i
n there? That doesn't make any sense. Um, usually you have to pick your your a s
pecific Oh, I did already have Reddus there. Okay. I I didn't realize it was eve
n in there. Yeah, I did. I did already type Reddis. Yeah. What the who who gets 
a cash and then thinks, you know what, I can go ahead and I I'm gonna need some 
analytics, some really expensive OLAP queries here and they're going to need a t
hey're gonna need a go just instantly. You you usually like have a stream and th
en you're going to attach this thing to the end of it. And so you you're going t
o go ahead and pick a real-time analytics um a real- time analytics like product
 for it. You're not going to like just be like, "Oh, shoot. you know, I got this
 like database here. Um, I wish I sure wish I could do some real-time analytics 
on my PostgreSQL instance. You usually have to grab one of these specific tools 
and then you're you're using it for that very specific access pattern that has a
risen. There's there's a specific access pattern of, you know, you uh view count
s on YouTube. It has arosen. you've already got your your YouTube video thing an
d then the PMs are like, "Okay, now we want to have this view counter and so you
 just grab this extra infrastructure component and you're using that for the job
." Um, again, very interesting trade-off in terms of the Braum conjecture. And I
 don't know if I had anything else for this video. Want to make sure that I cove
red everything that I wanted to talk about. All right, I guess that's everything
 that I wanted to cover. So, I'll let you guys go. Thanks for watching. 